# End User Considerations {#end-user-considerations}

[^End_User]

[^End_User]: "The mission of the IETF is to produce high quality, relevant technical and engineering documents that influence the way people design, use, and manage the Internet in such a way as to make the Internet work better" {{RFC3935}}. The mission statement further goes on to state, "We want the Internet to be useful for communities that share our commitment to openness and fairness. We embrace technical concepts such as decentralized control, edge-user empowerment and sharing of resources, because those concepts resonate with the core values of the IETF community." {{RFC3935}}. The Internet Architecture Board says that the "Internet is for end users" and "argues that the IETF should favor their interests over those of other parties" {{RFC8890}}. It logically follows that technical documents produced by the IETF ought to consider their impact on the Internet end user. For this reason, I suggest that specifications include a considerations section where authors assess the technical decisions and trade-offs in their proposals based on their ramifications on the interests of end users.

{: #end-user-classification}
End users of the HTTP protocol can be classified into two groups: publishers and consumers. Consumers have an incentive to subscribe to event-notifications from many resources and to hold on to a connection for as long as possible; whereas publishers bear the cost of server infrastructure. Consumers also typically outnumber publishers, in many cases by multiple orders of magnitude. This creates an imbalance in the effort to subscribe versus effort to deliver; consumers can easily place a disproportionate burden on servers, reminiscent of a denial-of-service attack.

{: #end-user-filter}
At the outset, requiring that clients subscribe to event-notifications per resource serves as an effective filtering mechanism that limits the burden on servers. Compare this to the typical implementation of protocols such as WebSockets {{WS}}, where clients connect to dedicated endpoints to receive notifications; the server either has to broadcast notifications for multiple resources or track resources of interest for each client to filter event-notifications accordingly.

{: #end-user-server-sets-limits}
{{&protocol}} empowers servers to decide, for any given resource, the events for which notifications are served and the content of the notifications. Servers are able to choose the duration for which they wish to serve notifications and are also free to end the response at any time. Servers implementing {{&protocol}} might, thus, be able to offer differentiated service to consumers. Authenticated consumers, for example, might be asked to share the cost burden with publishers in return for a higher quality of service.

{: #end-user-intermediation}
The use of HTTP Semantics also enables intermediation of event-notifications, unlike existing mechanisms built with protocols such as WebSockets {{WS}} or WebSub {{WEBSUB}}. Intermediaries can help with improving the latency and reliability of transmission of event-notifications as well as scaling of the event-notification traffic to reach a significantly larger base of consumers. On the flip side, economies of scale will likely lead to greater consolidation of intermediary service providers (though not centralization) with the attendant risk of anti-consumer behavior. In the opinion of the authors, policies designed to treat network traffic as a public utility might provide better outcomes for the end user.
